We find that existing language modeling
datasets contain many near-duplicate examples
and long repetitive substrings. As
a result, over 1% of the unprompted output
of language models trained on these
datasets is copied verbatim from the training
data. We develop two tools that allow
us to deduplicate training datasets—for example
removing from C4 a single 61 word English
sentence that is repeated over 60;000
times. Deduplication allows us to train models
that emit memorized text ten times less
frequently and require fewer training steps
to achieve the same or better accuracy. We
can also reduce train-test overlap, which affects
over 4% of the validation set of standard
datasets, thus allowing for more accurate
evaluation. Code for deduplication is released
at https://github.com/google-research/
deduplicate-text-datasets.


1 Introduction

A key factor behind the recent progress in natural
language processing is the development of largescale
text corpora used to train increasingly large
language models. These datasets have grown from
single gigabytes to as much as a terabyte over the
past few years (Chelba et al., 2013; Xue et al., 2020;
Graff et al., 2003; Brown et al., 2020). Because
it is so expensive to perform manual review and
curation on massive datasets, they tend to suffer
in quality compared to their smaller predecessors.
This has implications far beyond metrics like perplexity
and validation loss, as learned models reflect
the biases present in their training data (Bender
et al., 2021; Wallace et al., 2019; Sheng et al.,
2020). Quantitatively and qualitatively understanding
these datasets is therefore a research challenge
in its own right (Dodge et al., 2021a).

We show that one particular source of bias, duplicated
training examples, is pervasive: all four
common NLP datasets we studied contained duplicates.
Additionally, all four corresponding validation
sets contained text duplicated in the training
set. While naive deduplication is straightforward
(and the datasets we consider already perform some
naive form of deduplication), performing thorough
deduplication at scale is both computationally challenging
and requires sophisticated techniques.
We propose two scalable techniques to detect
and remove duplicated training data. Exact substring
matching identifies verbatim strings that are
repeated. This allows us to identify cases where
only part of a training example is duplicated (§4.1).
Approximate full document matching uses hashbased
techniques (Broder, 1997) to identify pairs
of documents with high n-gram overlap (§4.2).
We identify four distinct advantages to training
on datasets that have been thoroughly deduplicated.

1. Over 1% of tokens emitted unprompted from
a model trained on standard datasets (e.g., C4)
are part of a memorized sequence (See §6.2)—
even though the 1.5 billion parameter model
is much smaller than the 350GB dataset it
was trained on. By deduplicating the training
dataset we reduce the rate of emitting memorized
training data by a factor of 10.

2. Train-test overlap is common in nondeduplicated
datasets. For example, we find a
61-word sequence1 in C4 (Raffel et al., 2020)
that is repeated 61;036 times verbatim in the
training dataset and 61 times in the validation
set (0:02% of the samples in each dataset).

This train-test set overlap not only causes researchers
to over-estimate model accuracy, but
also biases model selection towards models
and hyperparameters that intentionally overfit
their training datasets.

3. Training models on deduplicated datasets is
more efficient. Processing a dataset with our
framework requires a CPU-only linear-time
algorithm. And so because these datasets are
up to 19% smaller, even including the deduplication
runtime itself, training on deduplicated
datasets directly reduces the training
cost in terms of time, dollar, and the environment
(Bender et al., 2021; Strubell et al., 2019;
Patterson et al., 2021).

4. Deduplicating training data does not hurt
perplexity: models trained on deduplicated
datasets have no worse perplexity compared
to baseline models trained on the original
datasets. In some cases deduplication reduces
perplexity by up to 10%. Further, because recent
LMs are typically limited to training for
just a few epochs (Radford et al., 2019; Raffel
et al., 2020), by training on higher quality data
the models can reach higher accuracy faster.


To summarize, data duplication offers significant
advantages and no observed disadvantages. In the
remainder of this paper we present our text deduplication
framework in §4, and study the extent of
duplicate content in common NLP datasets (e.g.,
C4, Wiki-40B, and LM1B) in §5. We then examine
the impact of deduplication on test perplexity
(§6.1) and on the frequency of emitting memorized
content (§6.2). Finally, we analyze to what extent
perplexity on existing, released models are
skewed as a result of overlap between the train and
test/validation splits (§6.3).


2 Related Work

Large language model datasets. While we believe
our results are independent of model architecture,
we perform our analysis on Transformerbased
decoder-only language models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) trained for open-ended text generation.
These current state-of-the-art models are trained
on internet text. For example, the GPT-2 family
of models Radford et al. (2019) is trained on Web-
Text, a dataset of web documents highly ranked on
Reddit—however this dataset was not made available
publicly. A common dataset starting point is CommonCrawl, an index of public webpages.
Among the models trained on CommonCrawl include
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) with the addition
of book datasets, GROVER (Zellers et al., 2019) on
a restricted subset filtered to news domains called
RealNews, and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) on a cleaned
version of common crawl called C4. Other models
are trained on more curated Internet sources—for
example Guo et al. (2020) used high quality processed
Wikipedia text from 40 different languages
to train monolingual 141.4M parameter language
models. Non-English models necessarily use different
datasets; Zeng et al. (2021) for instance introduced
PANGU-, a family of models with up to
200B parameters that were trained on a non-public
corpus of cleaned and filtered Chinese-language
documents from CommonCrawl and other sources.
Since many of these datasets are not public, we
deduplicate three that are: Wiki-40B, C4, and
RealNews–as well as the One Billion Word Language
Model Benchmark (Chelba et al., 2013), a
smaller dataset commonly used for evaluation.


Contamination of downstream tasks. When
models are trained on datasets constructed by crawling
the Internet, it is possible the model will train
on the test set of downstream target tasks. For example,
Radford et al. (2019, §4) performed a posthoc
analysis to identify 8-gram overlaps between
GPT-2’s training set and datasets used for evaluation,
and Dodge et al. (2021b) analyzed C4 and
found that up to 14.4% of test examples for various
standard tasks were found verbatim (normalizing
for capitalization and punctuation) in the dataset.
A more proactive approach removes contaminated
data. Trinh and Le (2018, Appendix B) removed
documents from their CommonCrawl-based train
set that overlapped substantially with the commonsense
reasoning used for evaluation. And GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020, §5) did the reverse and removed
downstream evaluation examples from their
training data by conservatively filtering out any
train set examples with a 13-gram overlap with
any evaluation example. Up to 90% of tasks were
flagged as potentially contaminated.


In our research, we do not focus on the impact of
duplicate text in pretrained models on downstream
benchmark tasks; instead we address how duplicate
text in the LM training and validation sets impacts
model perplexity and the extent to which generated
text included memorized content.

Memorizing training data. The privacy risks of
data memorization, for example the ability to extract
sensitive data such as valid phone numbers
and IRC usernames, are highlighted by Carlini et al.
(2020). While their paper finds 604 samples that
GPT-2 emitted from its training set, we show that
over 1% of the data most models emit is memorized
training data. In computer vision, memorization of
training data has been studied from various angles
for both discriminative and generative models (e.g.
Arpit et al., 2017; Webster et al., 2019; Feldman
and Zhang, 2020; Stephenson et al., 2021; Teterwak
et al., 2021).

Duplicate text in training data. The Book Corpus
(Zhu et al., 2015), which was used to train popular
models such as BERT, has a substantial amount
of exact-duplicate documents according to Bandy
and Vincent (2021). Allamanis (2019) shows that
duplicate examples in code datasets cause worsened
performance on code understanding tasks.


3 Language Modeling Datasets

We analyze the presence of duplicate text in four
datasets of varying sizes that have been used for
training natural language generation systems, producing
general-purpose pre-trained models, and for
language model benchmarking. While this paper
restricts itself to English datasets, we expect that
non-English datasets suffer from similar issues and
could likewise benefit from de-duplication.

Wikipedia (Wiki-40B) consists of multi-lingual
cleaned Wikipedia text (Guo et al., 2020). We
take the English portion, which contains 2.9M
Wikipedia pages with an average length of 768 BPE
tokens. The dataset creators do not indicate any
deduplication was performed aside from removing
redirect-pages (e.g., “sunflower” to “Helianthus”).

One-Billion Word benchmark (LM1B) contains
30M sentences of news commentary (Chelba
et al., 2013). Unlike the other datasets we analyze,
LM1B’s examples are one sentence long rather
than multi-sentence documents. The average example
length is 32 BPE tokens. While this dataset
is extremely standard for benchmarking language
models, Radford et al. (2019, Sec 4) note it has
13.2% overlap of the test set with the train set.

Colossal Cleaned Common Crawl (C4) is
made up of 360M web documents, with an average
length of 486 BPE tokens (Raffel et al., 2020). C4 was introduced as a pre-training dataset for T5, a set
of encoder-decoder models which have been widely
used in fine-tuned downstream tasks. The dataset
was previously deduplicated in a more sophisticated
process than the prior two datasets. Each
paragraph was hashed and paragraphs resulting in
hash collisions were removed. This was followed
by a pass that removed placeholder text, code, and
prohibited words. See Dodge et al. (2021a) for a
detailed breakdown of the source text in C4.

RealNews is a subset of the Common Crawl consisting
of articles from news domains (Zellers et al.,
2019). It contains 31M documents with average
length 793 BPE tokens. RealNews was deduplicated
by inserting a hash of the first 100 characters
of each document into a bloom filter (Bloom, 1970)
and then excluding any document which resulted in
a hash collision. Like C4, examples with duplicate
URLs were excluded.


4 Methods for Identifying Duplicates

The simplest technique to find duplicate examples
would be to perform exact string matching between
all example pairs, but as we will show, this is insufficient.
We introduce two complementary methods
for performing deduplication. First, using a suffix
array (Manber and Myers, 1993), we remove
duplicate substrings from the dataset if they occur
verbatim in more than one example. Second,
we use MinHash (Broder, 1997), an efficient algorithm
for estimating the n-gram similarity between
all pairs of examples in a corpus, to remove entire
examples from the dataset if they have high n-gram
overlap with any other example.
We consider a dataset D = fxigNi
=1 as a collection
of examples xi. Each of these examples is itself
a sequence of tokens: xi =

x1i
; x2i
;    ; xsi
i

.

4.1 Exact Substring Duplication

Due to the diversity of possibilities in human language,
it is rare for the same idea to be expressed
identically in multiple documents unless one expression
is derived from the other, or both are quoting
from a shared source. This observation motivates
deduplicating exact substrings. We call our
approach EXACTSUBSTR. When two examples
xi and xj share a sufficiently long substring (that
is, a substring for which xa::a+k
i = xb::b+k
j ), that
substring is removed from one of them. Based
on statistical analyses (§B), we select k = 50 tokens
as the minimum matching substring length.

A breakdown of the computation needed for this
approach can be found in Appendix B.


4.1.1 Suffix Arrays

This exact-substring-matching criterion, while conceptually
simple, is computationally prohibitive
with naive (quadratic) all-pair matching. To improve
the efficiency, we concatenate all the examples
of the entire dataset D into a giant sequence S,
and construct a Suffix Array A of S. A suffix array
(Manber and Myers, 1993) is a representation of a
suffix tree (Weiner, 1973) that can be constructed
in linear time in kSk (Kärkkäinen and Sanders,
2003) and enables efficient computation of many
substring queries; in particular, they allow us to
identify duplicated training examples in linear time.
Suffix arrays have the advantage over suffix trees
in that they are 10–100 more memory efficient
(Manber and Myers, 1993), requiring just 8 bytes
per input token, though they are asymptotically
less efficient for some query types. They have been
used widely in NLP, such as for efficient TF-IDF
computation (Yamamoto and Church, 2001) and
document clustering (Chim and Deng, 2007).
The suffix array A for a sequence S is a
lexicographically-ordered list of all suffixes contained
in the sequence. Formally,

For example, the suffixes of the sequence “banana”
are (“banana”, “anana”, “nana” “ana”, “na”, “a”)
and so the suffix array is the sequence (6 4 2 1 5 3).
In practice, we construct S from the bytes of the
BPE tokenization of the text (§6).


4.1.2 Substring matching

After constructing A, it is straightforward to identify
duplicated training examples. Suppose that
the sequence s was repeated exactly twice in the
training dataset S at positions i and j, that is,
Si::i+jsj = Sj::j+jsj. Then the indices i; j will occur
adjacent to each other in the suffix array A.

Finding all repeated sequences is thus a matter of
linearly scanning the suffix array from beginning to
end and looking for sequences Ai;Ai+1 that share
a common prefix of at least some threshold length.
Any satisfying sequences are recorded. This algorithm
is embarrassingly parallel, and so we can
efficiently process the dataset. Based on experimentation
(Appendix B), we choose a threshold
length of 50 BPE tokens for all experiments.

4.2 Approximate Matching with MinHash

We also perform approximate deduplication based
on matching entire examples. This method, which
we call NEARDUP, is a good complement to the
exact substring matching, especially for web crawl
text, as it handles the very common case of documents
being identical except for interspersed templated
fields (such as the last row of Table 1).

MinHash (Broder, 1997) is an approximate
matching algorithm widely used in large-scale
deduplication tasks (Versley and Panchenko, 2012;
Gabriel et al., 2018; Gyawali et al., 2020), including
to deduplicate the training set for a large
Chinese-language LM (Zeng et al., 2021). Given
two documents xi and xj , the main idea is to represent
each document by its respective set of n-grams
di and dj . We can then use hash functions to approximate
the Jaccard Index (Jaccard, 1912):

If the Jaccard Index between di and dj is sufficiently
high, it is likely that documents are approximate
matches of each other. To efficiently approximate
the Jaccard index, MinHash constructs document
signatures by sorting each of the n-grams
via a hash function, and then keeping only the k
smallest hashed n-grams. There are multiple ways
to construct estimators of the Jaccard index from
these kinds of signatures (Cohen, 2016).

In our implementation, we use 5-grams and a
signature of size 9,000. The probability that two
documents are considered a potential match is

where b = 20 and r = 450 are user-settable parameters
to control the strength of the filter. See
Appendix A for more details.

For each pair of documents identified as a potential
match, more computationally expensive similarity
metrics can be employed as a subsequent filtering
step. In particular, we identify two documents
as duplicates if they are matched by the MinHash
algorithm and their edit similarity is greater than
0.8. The edit similarity between token sequences
xi and xj is defined as:

To build clusters of similar documents, we construct
a graph that has an edge between two documents
if they are considered a match. Then, we use the method introduced in Ła˛cki et al. (2018) to
identify connected components. A breakdown of
the computation needed is given in Appendix A.


5 Deduplication Results

We deduplicate each of the four datasets with both
of our two techniques. When text was duplicated
across multiple data splits, we prioritized keeping
a copy in the test or validation set and removing it
from the train set.

5.1 Amount of Text Removed

With NEARDUP, we found that the web-scrape
datasets contain between 3.04% (on C4) to 13.63%
(on RealNews) near duplicates (Table 2). Nearduplicate
text is much less common in Wiki-40B,
forming only 0.39% of the train set.2 In C4, the majority
(1.8M) of near-duplicate clusters consisted of
just a single pair of examples that matched against
each other, but there were 280 clusters with over
5,000 examples in them (Figure 1), including one
cluster of size 250,933.

On average with EXACTSUBSTR, we remove
more total content than with NEARDUP (despite
EXACTSUBSTR not removing any examples
outright)—for example removing 7:18% of the tokens
in C4. The exception is LM1B, where EXACTSUBSTR
removes 8 less data than NEARDUP.
On investigation, we find this is due to the fact that
LM1B documents are significantly shorter: 90%
of all documents are under 50 tokens, and so are
not even candidates for potential matches even if
the entire sequence matched verbatim. We find
that both NEARDUP and EXACTSUBSTR remove
similar content—77% of the training examples that
NEARDUP removes from C4 have at least one verbatim
length-50 match found by EXACTSUBSTR.

5.2 Properties of Duplicated Text

While the authors of both RealNews and C4 explicitly
attempted deduplication during dataset construction,
the methods were insufficient to capture
the more subtle types of duplicate text commonly
found on the internet. In C4 and Wiki-40B, we
qualitatively observe that much of the text identified
as near-duplicated is computer-generated. The
text is identical except for the names of places, businesses,
products, dates, and so on. Because these
examples frequently differ by just a few words at
a time, deduplication strategies relying on exact
string matching would fail to identify a match. Example
duplicate pairs from each dataset can be
found in Table 1 (more examples in the Appendix).

For RealNews and LM1B, derived from news
sites, we observe that many near-duplicates occur
because the same news article appears on multiple
news sites with slightly different formatting. For
example, in LM1B, there is one example that starts
“MINEOLA , N.Y. - New York officials say [...]” and
another that starts “( AP ) - New York officials say
[...]”. The two examples are otherwise identical.


5.3 Train / Test Set Leakage

Both deduplication methods identify overlap between
the train set and the validation set (Table 2).
For example, 4.6% of the C4 validation set and
14.4% of the RealNews validation set examples
had an approximate duplicate in their respective
training sets. Such duplication is problematic since
it could cause evaluation metrics to be unfairly inflated
for models that are better at memorizing their
train sets. We evaluate the effect of this leakage on
publicly released models in Section 6.3.


6 Impact on Trained Models

We trained 1.5B parameter “XL", decoderonly,
Transformer-based language models similar
to GPT-2, on C4-ORIGINAL, C4-NEARDUP, and
C4-EXACTSUBSTR, respectively. We use the T5
codebase and model architecture from Raffel et al.
(2020), and each model was trained for about two
epochs on its respective dataset. To better understand
the amount of variance in the perplexities
of trained models, we also trained three different
random seeds of the 110M parameter “base" model
for each of the above three datasets—for a total of
nine base-sized models.

For all experiments, we used a Byte Pair Encoding
(BPE) vocabulary trained on C4-NEARDUP with a budget of 50K tokens, which resulted in a
vocabulary the same size as GPT-2’s. We trained
with a maximum sequence length of 512 tokens
(for longer documents, we randomly extracted subsequences
of this length.) Further training details
can be found in Appendix C.


6.1 Model Perplexity

We computed the perplexity of our trained models
on the validation sets of LM1B and Wiki-40B,
and on subsets of the C4 validation set (Figure 2).
For the base size, we observe that all models have
similar perplexity on the original C4 validation set
and on validation set examples that were identified
as unique (no near-duplicate in either train
or validation). However, both models trained on
deduplicated data have significantly higher perplexity
on validation set examples that have duplicates
in the training set than the model trained on the
original C4. EXACTSUBSTR-deduplicated results
in higher perplexity than NEARDUP-deduplicated.
These trends holds true for the XL sized model as
well. While this may suggest EXACTSUBSTR duplication
results in models least overfit on the train
set, note that both of these techniques have used
separate duplicate thresholds and a different choice
of thresholds could change the results.

When evaluating on the validation sets of LM1B
and Wiki-40B, we found that models trained on
NEARDUP-deduplicated C4 consistently achieved
lowest perplexity (for LM1B eval with base models,
see Appendix Figure 7). EXACTSUBSTR deduplication
decreases perplexity of the XL model by
almost 3 points perplexity on Wiki-40B which is much larger than the variation of about 1 point perplexity
we observed in the base models. This is
despite seeing fewer tokens of training data overall.

Lastly, we note all our XL models achieved <35
perplexity on LM1B, which is less than the 42.16
perplexity reported for the 1.5B GPT-2 using a
vocabulary the same size as ours.


6.2 Generated Text

Data duplication has the effect of biasing the
trained LM towards particular types of examples.
This can contribute to a lower diversity of generations,
and increased likelihood that the generated
content is copied from the training data (Carlini
et al., 2020). For our generation experiments, we
use top-k random sampling with k = 50 and experiment
with prompted and unprompted generation.

No prompt. We first evaluate memorization tendencies
in the case where the model is asked
to generate text without any prompt sequence.
We generate 100,000 samples, each up to 512
tokens in length (examples provided in the Appendix).
For each generated token, we say the
token is memorized if it is part of a 50-token substring
that is exactly contained in the training data.
On XL-ORIGINAL, over 1% of the generated tokens
belong to memorized sub-sequences (see Table
4). This is  10 more memorization than XLEXACTSUBSTR
or XL-NEARDUP. Some example
subsequences that were copied verbatim from the
train set can be found in Table 9 in the Appendix.

With prompting. In most real use cases, language
model generation is controlled by providing
a prompt for the model to continue. We experiment
with four possible prompt sources: training
examples identified by EXACTSUBSTR as having
near-duplicates in the train set (train dup), training
examples identified as unique (train unique),
validation set examples with a near-duplicate in
the train set (valid in train), and validation set examples identified as unique across all splits (valid
unique). We select the first 32 tokens of each example
as the prompt, which means we can evaluate the
fraction of generations which are near-duplicates
with the ground-truth continuation for the prompt
(Figure 3). When the prompt comes from duplicate
examples in the train set, XL-ORIGINAL reproduces
the groundtruth continuation over 40% of the
time. XL-EXACTSUBSTR and XL-NEARDUP still
copy the groundtruth more often when the prompt
comes from a duplicate example than when the
prompt comes from a unique example, suggesting
that more stringent deduplication may be necessary
to remove memorization tendencies entirely.


6.3 Impact on Existing Models

Train-test leakage does not just impact models
trained on C4. Table 5 shows that the presence
of near-duplicates of the evaluation set in the train
set has a significant impact on model perplexity
for two standard models: Transformer-XL (Dai
et al., 2019), which was trained on LM1B, and
GROVER (Zellers et al., 2019), which was trained
on RealNews. For Transformer XL, the perplexity halves on examples identified as near-duplicates.
For GROVER, the difference, though not quite as
stark, is present in both model sizes considered.

Existing models also suffer from the problem
of generating text from their train sets. We find
that 1:38% of the tokens in the official release of
25k GROVER-Mega outputs 3 are part of verbatim
matches in RealNews of at least length 50. Likewise,
more than 5% of the tokens in ~200k sequences
outputted by GPT-Neo 1.3B (Black et al.,
2021) are part of a 50 token matches of its training
data, the Pile (Gao et al., 2020).


7 Discussion

The focus of this paper is on the datasets used to
train language models. While recent work focused
on documenting the potential harms that could arise
from problematic datasets (Bender and Friedman,
2018; Gebru et al., 2020), less work has been done
to quantitatively analyze properties of real language
modelling datasets, like Dodge et al. (2021a) has
done for C4. Our paper provides analysis on one
particular axis, that of data duplication.

Our experiments measured what could be quantified:
the amount of duplicate content in common
datasets, the effect of deduplication on trained
model perplexity, and the reduction of memorized
content in trained models through deduplication.
We do not focus on the nature of the data being
removed by deduplication or memorized by LMs.

Privacy is an important subject for future work,
as memorized training data has significant privacy
consequences. By this, we mean the standard privacy
definition that a model should not reveal anything
particular to the specific dataset it was trained
on, as opposed to another training dataset from a
similar distribution (Shokri et al., 2017).4 Training
on standard datasets that have not yet been
deduplicated results in models that are particularly
sensitive to examples that happened to be repeated
multiple times, and this has negative privacy implications.
For instance, it could violate a person’s
expectations of privacy if their publicly available
personal data appeared in a different, surprising
context. Downstream applications of LMs, such as the game AI Dungeon5, should also not output
memorized content like adverts for real products.

We stress that in our experiments, we do not distinguish
between undesired memorized text (such
as phone numbers), innocuous memorized text
(common phrases), and text we may want to be
memorized (such as a quote by a public figure),
and instead treat all instances of the LM generating
text that closely matches the training set as
problematic. While we qualitatively observed that
much of the identified memorized content was relatively
innocuous, a more systematic study of the
risks associated with the detected memorization
was beyond the scope of this work.

We also do not investigate the negative consequences
of deduplication. Some language tasks
explicitly require memorization, like document retrieval
or closed-book question answering. Also,
text that gives attribution is often duplicated across
documents, so removing duplicate substrings could
correspond to removing just the attribution, which
could result in models that learn the content without
its attached attribution. Deduplication is also
not sufficient to remove privacy-sensitive data like
bank passwords and medical records which should
never be used in training data (Brown et al., 2022).

Ultimately, whether memorization is a desired
property of a language model, or else risky and
unwanted, depends both on the nature of the text
that has been memorized and on the downstream
applications of the trained model. However, since
the trend has been towards creating datasets and
models that are application-agnostic, we encourage
researchers to think carefully about the limitations
of the data they have collected and the how the
model’s intended usage constrains what should be
part of the training set. Developing techniques to
memorize or forget specific sequences depending
on the end application is a promising research direction.


8 Conclusion

We encourage future language model research to
perform dataset deduplication, either by training
on the deduplicated datasets we release, using the
deduplication tools we release, or following our
approach to deduplicate datasets with new tools.

The exact technique used to perform deduplication
is less important than performing stringent
deduplication in the first place. On the whole, deduplication does not harm, and sometimes improves,
model perplexity, despite the fact that the deduplicated
datasets are smaller and faster to train on.
It is especially important that there are no duplicates
between the training and testing sets, because
overlap here explicitly encourages selecting models
that memorize the training data. Lastly, deduplication
helps to reduce some of the privacy concerns
around LMs memorizing their training data.


Ethics

The developers of large language models typically
attempt to create training data that reflects
natural human communication, but current methods
to collect and curate such datasets are fallible.
There are multiple reasons some text ends
up over-represented. For example, bot replies,
auto-generated templates, and licenses are repeated
for structural (e.g., legal, economical) reasons (as
was also observed by Dodge et al. (2021a)). Additionally,
common techniques for acquiring and
“cleaning” data can result in an over-representation
of particular subsets of world users, often those
who are English-speaking and publishing in established
forums. This effectively under-represents
non-English speakers as well as groups whose communication
mostly occurs outside of the public
web. In this paper, we focus on the problem of
over-representation of some types of text (structural
duplicates) but do not address the problem of
under-representation of others.

Additionally, while we discuss when memorized
content might be desired and when it might not
be desired, our analysis does not disambiguate
these two cases. Work to disambiguate helpful
from harmful memorization is tremendously complex
and would require a different set of research
methodologies than are presented in this work.


A Further Details on NEARDUP

For our MinHash based deduplication method, documents
are first space tokenized, then each consecutive
5-gram is hashed using tabulation hashing.
The set of these hashes is the signature for the document.
For each element in a document’s signature,
the element is hashed using k other hash functions.
The minimum hashed element for each of the k
hash functions is stored. These minimum hashes
are then partitioned into r buckets, with b hashes
per bucket. These b hashes are augmented into a
single value, then if two documents have the same
value in at least one bucket, they’ll be marked as
a potential match. The probability that two documents
are considered a potential match is equal
to

where si;j is the Jaccard index between the two
documents i and j. For document pairs that were
identified as potential matches, we computed their
actual Jaccard index, and if that was above 0.8,
we computed their edit similarity. Document pairs
with edit similarity higher than 0.8 were identified
as duplicates. After some experimentation, we
chose to use b = 20, and r = 450, so k = 9; 000,
so as to make sure a collision at the desired Jaccard
index threshold of 0.8 had a high probability of
occurring.

We also tested an alternative configuration—
filtering to document pairs with Jaccard index of at
least 0.9 and edit similarity of at least 0.9. In this
case, we used b = 20, r = 40, and k = 800. Figure
4 shows the histogram of Jaccard similarities
and edit similarities for all document pairs which
collided in min-hash space, for our chosen configuration
(blue) and for the alternative configuration
(orange). This allows us verify if the threshold
chosen has few comparisons around the chosen
threshold, then we’ve likely captured the majority
of actual near duplicates above that threshold. To
verify that yourself, look at the left hand tails of
the distributions. Since both 0.8 and 0.9 begin to
vanish at the same point (in spite of the fact that the
two thresholds are optimized for accuracy around
different thresholds), we feel comfortable saying
that we’re capturing the majority of actual near
duplicates.

Computational Analysis Let N be the number
of documents and T be the maximal number of tokens in a document. Edit similarity has a worst case
complexity of T2, so the worst case complexity is

since b, k, and T are all  N. The left term is the
complexity of grouping by the signatures, and the
right represents the pathological worst case of all
documents falling into the same B buckets.

The highly distributed NEARDUP implementation
we employed is one used for large-scale production
tasks at Google. On the English C4 dataset,
the algorithm consumed approximately 41.5 kWh
of energy. Note that our choices of k and b were
designed to produce very high recall, and with different
parameters, the algorithm could be made
much more energy efficient while producing similar
results.


B Further Details on EXACTSUBSTR

Parallel linear time construction. We build a
parallelized linear time suffix array algorithm. As
a building block, we make black-box use of the
SA-IS algorithm for constructing a suffix array
in linear time Nong et al. (2009); Ko and Aluru
(2003). Unfortunately, this algorithm is not easily
parallelized directly, so we introduce a simple
divide and conquer approach to parallelizing the
array construction.

We build our implementation in Rust and extend
an existing suffix array library6 with three
modification. The first two are straightforward implementation
differences: we modify the code to
allow datasets larger than 4GB, and we remove the
requirement that strings parse as valid UTF-8 sequences
in favor of raw byte sequences. Our third
change is more significant: we re-implement the
algorithm so that we can stream the suffix array
itself off disk.

Parallel partial suffix array construction. Our
divide and conquer suffix array construction algorithm
starts by partitioning the dataset intoK different
“splits” with SA-IS run over independently on
each split in parallel. This algorithm still requires
O(N) work but runs in O(N=K) wall-clock time.
This gives us N separate suffix arrays Ai.

Given two suffix arrays A1 and A2 for two sequences
S1 and S2 it’s not completely trivial to
construct a single suffix array A for S = S1 jj S2
because of the boundary conditions. Instead, we don’t build the data S = S1 jj S2 but rather let
S01
= S1 jj S2[uptoK] for some K greater than
the longest substring match. Then we build the
arrays on S01
and S2. To merge the arrays together
we can remove the items from the first array after
index jS1j and merge-sort insert them into the
second.

Parallel merge of partial suffix arrays. We
now merge these separate arrays together into a
single suffix array A, Consider the simpler case of
two partial suffix arrays B and C that we would
like to merge together. We can achieve this by
letting i = 0 index B and j = 0 index C. Each
iteration of the algorithm then pushes Bi into A
if SBi:: < SCi and Ci otherwise, repeating until
i = jBj 􀀀 1 and j = jCj 􀀀 1. To generalize to K
splits, we need only replace the single comparison
above with a min-heap requiring O(logK)  10
work on each iteration.

Observe that in the general case this algorithm
is O(Nmlog(K)) where N is the length of the
dataset, m is the average length of a prefix match,
and K is the number of splits. It is therefore incorrect
to call this algorithm linear time in the general
case, for ours it is. Because the length of the longest
match is bounded above by the length of the longest
sequence, as long as the size of the dataset is independent
of the length of the longest sequence in the
dataset, this algorithm remains efficient.

Again, we can parallelize this operation among
L simultaneous jobs (in practice we set K = L as
the number of threads on our machine). In the K =
2 case, job l processes i 2 [jN=L; (j + 1)N=L],
choosing the bounds of j by binary searching into C so that SBi < SCj < SBj+1. The case where
K > 2 is identical except that we repeat this over
all K partial suffix arrays.


Computational Analysis. We run our algorithm
on a single VM on the cloud with 96 cores and
768GB of memory. Our algorithm is efficient, for
example processing the Wiki-40B training set (3
million examples containing 4GB of text) in 2:3
minutes wall-clock time (2:1 CPU-hours of work).
The 350GB C4 dataset takes under 12 hours (wallclock)
to build a suffix array; although we are still
memory constrained and so this corresponds to
 1000 CPU-hours. Once the suffix array has been
constructed, it takes under an hour to deduplicate
the C4 dataset.

Note that this algorithm still requires that the
dataset itself fits in memory (so that we can efficiently
index in arbitrary positions), but we do not
need to fit the entire suffix array into memory. This
is fortunate since our suffix array requires an 8
space overhead. For example, the suffix array for
the 350GB C4 is 1:5TB.

Compared to the cost of training a language
model on this dataset, the additional work required
to deduplicate the training dataset is negligible.


Setting a threshold of duplicates. An important
question is how long must a substring match be
before it is counted as a duplicate. In Figure 5, we
plot the frequency of substring matches within the
four datasets we will consider. For each substring
of length k, we compute the probability that there
exists another sequence of length k identical to this one; formally:

We choose 50 tokens as the threshold to be conservative:
the “bend in the knee” occurs at 10 tokens,
and manual inspection of length-25 matches found
no false positives. We then doubled this value to
have an exceptionally large margin for error.

C Further Details on Model Training

Each model was trained for two epochs. Since both
C4-ORIGINAL and C4-EXACTSUBSTR contain approximately
365M examples, we performed 152K
steps with a batch size of 4800 (or approximately
2 epochs). C4-NEARDUP contains approximately
350M examples, we performed 146K steps (or approximately
2 epochs). On a 128-core TPU v3 pod
slice, XL models trained on C4-ORIGINAL and C4-
EXACTSUBSTR took approximately 131 hours (5.5
days) to train, while the XL model trained on C4-
NEARDUP took approximately 126 hours to train.
Like T5, models were trained with the Adafactor
optimizer (Shazeer and Stern, 2018). A constant
learning rate of 0.01 was used for the base models
and 0.001 for the XL models.

The 1.5B parameter XL models had 24 layers,
each with 32 attention heads. The model embedding
size was 2,048, the feed forward layers had
a hidden size of 5,120, and the key/value dimension
size for the attention heads 64. The 110M parameter base models had 12 layers, each with 12
attention heads. The model embedding size was
768, the feed forward layers had a hidden size of
2,048, and the key/value dimension size for the
attention heads 64.



